Off-the-Calf: Can BSXinsight Be Used on Other Parts of the Body?

At BSX Athletics, our team is actively working to turn your body's most important
bio-data into simple, actionable information. During the course of our studies,
we regularly come across interesting data that might be of interest to the folks
who are using our hardware and software. We plan to be more diligent in sharing
those insights!


One topic that interests us (and some of our customers) is: Can BSXinsight be
used to measure physiologically-relevant data at other locations on the body
besides the calf? The short answer is yes. Below are a few early observations
from our testing.


Testing: Our subject - BSX's own Adam Alter - volunteered to do an 8-stage Lactate
threshold (LT) assessment on an indoor bike trainer.


* Each interval was 3 minutes.  * The first interval was against a resistance
of 120 watts.  * The second interval started at 200 watts, and the resistance
was increased by 20 watts until the end.  * The end was 320 watts.


We convinced Adam to wear additional BSXinsight units on his lower back, upper
chest, and right forearm. Therefore, we were able to  collect data for 24 minutes
from 4 different sites on Adam.


Takeaways: The first outcome from this study is shown in Figure 1 below. That's
a montage from Adam's dashboard showing that LT was more or less determined to
be the same regardless of where the BSXinsight sensor was placed. Keeping in
mind that BSXinsight is specifically designed for use on the calf, it appears
that similar results for an LT assessment can be measured on the lower and upper
torso as well as upper extremities.


 results-pic.jpg



Figure 1 - Adam's image of his dashboard for LT results for 4 body sites.


BSXinsight provides a measure of how much of the blood in the muscle under the
sensor is oxygenated at a given point in time, or muscle oxygen. In Figure 2
below, we're looking at the trends in muscle oxygen during Adam's LT assessment.
The power plateaus are plotted for reference.


* The green, yellow, and red shading corresponds to times during the assessment
that can be classified as aerobic, transition, and anaerobic zones.  * The
vertical dashed red line is Adam's LT, as determined from the calf measurement.


 SmO2_multiple_locations.png



Figure 2 - A look at muscle oxygenation.




The trends in muscle oxygen levels for the 4 body sites we're looking at are the
same as a function of time. Early on, when Adam is warming up in the first and
second stages, muscle oxygen moves around a bit.


At 360 seconds, Adam is starting to work more and his blood is circulating more
thoroughly. From that mark until about 820 seconds, he's in the green zone.
Muscle oxygen is decreasing as power increases, but the change as a function of
time is relatively small. He is still in the aerobic zone.


By the time he hits the green-yellow border (that's LT1, or the beginning of the
aerobic to anaerobic transition zone), muscle oxygen trends start going down a
little faster and deeper than before: that's where the demand for oxygen by the
muscle is making a dent in the supply. The downward slopes of the lines in the
yellow zone are more pronounced than in the green zone.


Finally, Adam crosses into the red zone at 1120 seconds, corresponding to hit
calf-derived LT of 289 watts. After crossing the yellow-red border (thats LT2,
where the subject is fully anaerobic), its downhill and fast: demand for muscle
oxygen greatly exceeds supply.


Recap: In short - yes, while BSXinsight is designed for the calf to maintain
consistency, it can be placed in different areas of the body and still get results
for an LT assessment that agree within 5% of the calf measurement. Weve seen
this behavior on multiple occasions for Adam, but need to examine more subjects
to provide anything more concrete than the anecdotal observations we make in
this post.


While the BSXinsight is able to get the same results from different areas of the
body, we encourage you to place it in the same position on your body every time.
This will ensure the data measured is consistent over time, and that any discrepancy
wont be related to differences between muscle groups. And while we do encourage
and want to hear about experimentation, keep in mind that BSXinsight is designed
for use on the calf.
